[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast a production of
neon.pdf
solution in this conversation we
discussed how bit VM is empowering
building in the Bitcoin ecosystem how
Bitcoin and ethereum mutually benefit
one another Bitcoins developer
Renaissance bridging Solutions and their
trust assumptions forthcoming Bitcoin
enabled applications bitcoin's
existential questions and so much more
just a reminder nothing said on this
podcast is a solicitation to buy or sell
any tokens and that the guest or host
May hold tokens discussed in any given
episode if you enjoyed this episode
please rate and review it on your
favorite podcasting platform and share
it with your friends and family every
rate review like and comment really
helps us get this in front of more ears
and eyes with all that said I really
enjoyed speaking with alexe and I hope
you enjoyed the conversation too hey
everyone welcome to the smart economy
podcast today we're joined by alexe the
co-founder of build on bitcoin which we
will be calling Bob a hybrid L2 chain
that combines Bitcoin security with the
programmability of ethereum alexe super
psyched to chat with you today how you
doing great thanks for having me yes so
I've been really excited to just delve
into the wonderful world of building in
the Bitcoin ecosystem and I think that
Bob is doing some really great things in
combining two of of the best kind of uh
forces that are out there with the two
blue chip ecosystems Bitcoin and
ethereum so to kind of get the
conversation started with Bob and with
the way that you're building and with
the communities and assets you're trying
to connect what's more of a powerful
driver for Bob is it Bitcoins kind of
still you know huddled $2 trillion in
liquidity or is it this programmability
in smart contract driven D5 verticals
that are in ethereum land so naturally I
think the driving factor for growth will
be Bitcoin but not just the2 trillion
market cap but bitcoin's distribution um
and very diverse and Global Community
very old community community that
stretches through not only almost every
web3 startup whether it's an exchange
and has been around for ages like coin b
or Kraken or a new startup but also far
beyond beyond our crypto ecosystem into
institutions into big businesses Banks
Merchants so that I think is Bitcoin
superpower it has distribution It Is by
now mainstream right we all recall when
everybody was hating on bitcoin for its
proof of work and the energy consumption
it suddenly stopped well because now the
banks are selling you the ETF so I think
that is Bitcoin superpower it has a
brand and if you think of I love to make
a comparison with apple when see the
Apple logo right you know exactly what
it stands for and they spend billions of
dollars to get there bitcoin's already
there everybody knows Bitcoin so that's
basically bitcoin's hidden power for
growth but for bootstrapping and that's
where the hyperd design comes in for
bootstrapping ethereum is equally as
important if not more important because
ethereum allows us to bring tooling
infrastructure U ux improvements things
that make web 3 usable that make defa
usable take what's already there work
with some of the best teams in the space
to collaboratively design products that
can then make Bitcoin more useful so
arguably it's hard to pick a winner and
that's why we're a hybrid but for us
it's really bootstrapping and getting
started and leveling the playing field
between the usability and things you
could on ethereum and Bitcoin leveling
the playing field and then start growing
leveraging Bitcoin superpowers and it's
interesting that you mention uh this
kind of brand that Bitcoin has if you
were to go back to 2021 maybe even 2022
and before there was the the toxic
Bitcoin Maxi so as you're building in
the Bitcoin space and you're leveraging
this kind of programmability that
ethereum and evm programming provides
are you running into these headwalls of
toxic Bitcoin Maxis are you starting to
see a new class of Bitcoin hodler or
maybe there was even a silent majority
that was there that wasn't toxic and now
you're kind of able to reach them I mean
I like the last thing you said that
there there was a silent majority that
wasn't toxic I think that was always the
case I mean what how do you define a
Bitcoin Maxi I'm a Bitcoin Maxi I've
been working in Bitcoin for 10 years now
does it make me a maxi I mean yes I've
always worked in Bitcoin but always then
or very often on the intersection of
bitco and other networks because we
always saw the value of expanding
looking Beyond
what Bitcoin has today and learning from
other ecosystems and trying to combine
these things be it with Bridges be it
with building like cross trim protocols
so I used to be one of the people that
would get Uninvited from some the B Maxi
conferences because we're doing a bridge
really depends I was also like spent
some years doing a PhD and you know as a
researcher you could you know sneak in
and then tell you oh yeah you're a
researcher fine do your thing explore
you'll come back to bitcoin eventually
which which we did and suddenly now it
flipped right now it's like bit VM is
the hottest thing and everybody is like
super excited about it the l2s are
everywhere um yes there's also more
nonsense but but that's part of of
essentially Renaissance right you you
have new more Innovation not everything
makes sense you a lot you also get
grifters but that's just part of a
growing ecosystem that's when things are
moving you you get both sides of the
coin so I think over the years um we've
we've had a lot of encounters with
Bitcoin m taxes and what I experienced
personally and with a lot of my friends
who worked in Bitcoin early on on the
research site specifically um there was
so much headwind to in innovate to
propose changes to bitcoin was scuti
upon like how dare you like that's not
okay would even get to a point where
academic papers that asked for Bitcoin
software became like irrelevant I mean
in know fairness by now if you're asking
for if you're new thing works with
Bitcoin if it were a ker Fork it's
probably also no longer relevant like
doesn't really happen
so a lot of people left a lot of people
went to build on other things if you
think of Celestia most St used to work
on bitcoin and cyof an avalanche started
with Bitcoin and there's more like
there's dozens of examples like this I
mean the most famous vake started with
Bitcoin right and and it's fine right
it's okay to go experiment somewhere
else and then come back to bitcoin and
try to apply the learnings and lessons
learn because Bitcoin is essentially
this this Bastion that that protects
everything else and like gives us this
alternative to to the dollar or to to a
centralized Financial system however to
come back to your question recently for
the last year and a half maybe two years
we've seen a shift and the shift stems
from years and years of work right it
took us a long time to get here it's not
that it's like sub it feels sudden to to
somebody who is observing this from the
outside that bitco was silent this rock
and Sun lead can do nfts out of nowhere
and people are super excited everybody
wants an ordinal and everybody wants BRC
20s and and then there's room
and suddenly you have this massive
community of people that's super excited
and we're talking about Bitcoin Forks
again and now there's a list in the
Bitcoin Wiki there's a list of really
collecting feedback on what's the next
next soft Fork which is fascinating that
will been Unthinkable two three years
ago because these discussions didn't
happen in public and because the
community wasn't as open and there
wasn't so much demand for these things
from the broader Community you always
had a very strong core community in bco
on the technical side but public
interest was subsiding and there's two
things right there is the shift in in
the community side in the sentiment you
I think have an overall acceptance that
lightning is failing that it does not
fulfill its purpose as a payment system
there's a realization that people don't
necessarily want to pay with Bitcoin yet
and that stable coins have strong
product Market fit there is a
realization that lightning has po ux
something that was known from day one
there is realization that fighting
everything else that is innovation
doesn't work and there's a realization
that actually there was cult like
movement of the podcast Mafia we like to
call them which basically turned this
into religion and talked only about
hyperbitcoinization and you should sell
everything and and all everything else
are coins and and that just doesn't
really work it's the wrong approach to
something that's meant to be open why is
your use case better than my Bitcoin use
case it's meant to be usable for
everything right ideally it's not
illegal and ideally we all do good
things with it
so just carving out the illegal stuff
cuz nobody wants that but still like
what's illegal in your country what's
illegal in my country am I allowed to
send you
money so that cultural shift was very
important and it started or like got
really like it started before ordinals
and then with ordinals it really went
hyperbolic because it's so approachable
everybody knows nfts you could do them
on bitcoin it's also a good narrative
because you're actually storing the data
on bitcoin you're taking something that
you think is valuable some digital AR
putting it onto the most expensive most
secure database in the world and and in
parallel we got BM and staky so in
parallel you have like two new Technical
Innovations interestingly both go back
to Robbin so Robin came up with stick
chains and then bit VM so deserves
actually quite a bit of credit um on the
technical side and these things became
possible through the tap upgrades so if
you trace back everything was actually
the Tapo upgrade that achieved something
that it wasn't meant to do but never
never nobody expected orals nobody
expected bit VM after taid like I can't
overstate how incredible it's been to
see this growth and building within the
Bitcoin ecosystem it's one of the
reasons why I've been working in an ALT
L1 ecosystem since 2018 basically
because there's only so far that lifting
weights and eating steak will take you
as a community and you know denouncing
the US dollar and the Federal Reserve
okay you know that's a great point but
how is that going to carry me for years
and years and years and how am I going
to onboard my dad with that argument so
it's it's kind of phenomenal to hear
your background in the Bitcoin ecosystem
and I kind of want to like hone in on
that real quickly so maybe you can just
kind of give us the Genesis story of the
first time you came across Bitcoin and
did it click for you immediately or do
you also have like the second part of
your tale where there was an aha moment
where you're like this is where I need
to be so I heard about Bitcoin pretty
early on I was studying computer science
naturally it came up and I remember
finding it interesting but didn't really
pay attention too much like you know you
people mention it you hear about it I
was really interested in it security um
always found the aspect of like privacy
and sensorship resistance pretty
exciting and was kind of zeroing in in
that domain and and initially my
bachelor thesis was supposed to be on
obfuscating tour traffic behind Skype
traffic so you could use tour but you
wouldn't your IP wouldn't see because it
it looks like you're using Skype and of
course like where you if you start
researching tour like what's the main us
case well Sil cow pops up and at the
same time the supervisor was also from
the same research lab there was I think
actually I keep telling the story it's
the same it's actually another person at
the that was offering the other topic
was offering a research topics on
bitcoin and I naturally got really
excited and dove in and the interesting
B is it wasn't Bitcoin it was namecoin
that got me really excited so Bitcoin
makes sense payments interesting Finance
interesting oh but here's an altcoin the
first one that has Bitcoin secutive
through merge Mining and it's actually
targeted at sensor persistence a better
DNS that I found super interesting and
that kind of from then it was really a
random walk I looked into merge mining
because realized namecoin failed what
because everything was squatted all the
names had been brought up why or because
merge mining people were getting these
free coins they couldn't sell them
really in the market they didn't know
what to do so it was to just buy domains
what's merge mining well it's the first
way to actually do cross chain into
interactions between two chains for
security and from there it went to
Bridges and yeah and ultimately I ended
up doing a PhD at in pure College also
by pure coincidence was there when the
position open it was funded by
blockchain.com and the initial goal was
to work on Lightning so I spent some
time looking into that wasn't too
excited just because it's so complex and
and I had a hard time imagining retail
users being able to really follow and
understand and if you remember the
original lightning paper it's like it
was hard to read but for someone who is
new I web to user trying to you know
remember how these things work and like
I need to be online now and I need to
trigger this you know you can abstract
the complexity fully but then you're
custodial at again and then I I really
started working on bitcoin sidechains
and bridges so how do we actually bring
Bitcoin to a networks how do we create
something that has Bitcoin security
potentially or if we cannot easily do
that how do we Bridge it to other things
like ethereum and we designed trust
minimized bitcon Bridges um we prove
that bridging is actually impossible so
we we have my my PhD was supposed to be
on trustless bitcoin Bridges or
trustless Bridges the result was yeah it
doesn't work you always need to trust
someone so quite disappointing result
but we proved it at least um but here is
a ton of solutions how you can actually
get it done in practice using Game
Theory like you need to trust someone
but this could be anyone this could be
Yi anyone in the network or it could be
someone who's actually collateralized so
if like slash so if they miss they have
some stake and if they misbehave they
lose their money so things like that and
you see a lot of this ultimately is
reflected in the Bob design and the
things we've been doing um over the last
couple of years also then in in the
product side I about two years ago I
went on a campus tour here in the US to
about 9 different universities and I met
with blockchain clubs all around the US
to speak with students about building
careers in crypto blockchain web 3 and I
kept thinking as I was meeting these 18
19 20 year olds I will be shocked if you
actually graduate because you're
building a product right now and you
might just go by the way of like all our
favorite Silicon Valley Founders and
drop out to work on your project you
have your PhD in computer science so
you've gone through bachelor's you've
gone through your Masters you've gone
through the the PhD course do you find
that having that high level of Education
in computer science has been able to
propel or or spring the work that you do
forward or was it kind of like I'm on
this path and damn it I'm going to
finish and get my piece of paper so for
me it was a bit different so I had no
Computer Science Education before my
bachelors right so at school we didn't
really have that I was interested I was
doing some stuff of my own but it wasn't
as easy to learn these things it wasn't
as accessible back in 2012 you could do
it right but you know I started like I
took a course at University in my last
school year to just you know learn some
coding and and then I got really
interested and then for me it was okay
like this is me like really getting a
computer science education really
learning how to code really getting
really good at getting really good at it
and when I discovered
Bitcoin the kind of like the PHD just
happened and the decision for me was
okay people were starting to get
interested in the topic I started
working on bitcoin after they crashed
back like to I think hundred something
dollars and it people was saying it was
dead was gone it's dead ruined it's
going to die and why are you spending
your time on this like my parents were
frustrated like what is this what are
you doing online casino stuff and the
PHD happened because I I I it felt like
the best way to a work on this topic in
a meaningful way and have impact and
really develop solutions that made this
better um and and it was with an
industry inside because it was funded by
one of the biggest companies or most
well-known companies in the space back
then with blockchain.com and at the same
time I had opportunities to go and work
for like consultancy businesses that
were selling blockchain to their
customers and when I looked at what they
were
selling that was really had nothing to
do with with web 3 essentially right it
was super early on now it's very
different right now people have realized
that a theorum is a thing and you have
like Enterprise solutions that might
make sense sure but back then it was
like
it didn't really make sense and so for
me the PHD was not like okay I'm going
to get my my degree and like I'm going
to call myself a doctor it was more like
okay I get to do research I get I have
funding I have access to someone who
like a company that's really well
position in the space great but that's a
unique opportunity and then basically
one a half years into the PHD I mean my
my Dominic my co-founder there we were
in the same lab but were the first two
phds that focus on cryptocurrency
actually in Imperial College and we kind
of were like okay we actually want to
build this stuff like theory is nice but
it kind of feels wrong because you write
you just you come up with the idea you
write the paper you go submit like you
submit peer review to a peer review
conference you get accepted publish the
paper you go present and then you're
done it just it just stops there and if
I look back and if I compare to start of
life cycle basically it's the same thing
you've just raised money and then you
just stop before things get exciting
before you actually get to build it um
so we started kind of looking for what
to spin out and after 2 years into the
PHD we we created the company and we
dropped out for a while we had at that
point completed most of our research
requirements so like you have to publish
a certain amount of like top tier papers
to to be able to qualify and like get
the degree and we basically started
working on the business and building
bridges for things like PKA dos um and
working also on the resarch with Cosmos
and we negotiated with a bunch of the
big um l1s for the Bitcoin bridging side
and we realized that okay well doesn't
really scale that much because you know
doing only consultancies isn't super
interesting and then we really went to
just to run this as like a product and
like approaching business from that side
so the PG naturally led to the company I
wouldn't say that it really kind of
gives me massive advantage in this space
it does help with things like bit VM and
the designing highly complex systems
that should be secure because having
this understanding of you know
distributor systems and how to proof
security how to really approach this
from like a proper like first principles
design standpoint helps a lot does it
make me more qualified absolutely not
right there's so many people out there
that have no no degree and they're so
much more qualified in Bitcoin than I am
and I look up to these people so it's I
would really say it's optional and it
it's nice in some to some extent but you
won't see me going around and see oh I
have a PhD title I'm I'm better at this
than you it's like that not how it works
in our in our in the space yeah it
sounds like you had a kind of a golden
opportunity with blockchain.com and it
was really a nice cushion to kind of
keep building especially pre 2021 I mean
I got into the space in 2017 2018 I went
full-time and that bare Market was
brutal so doing anything you can have to
kind of survive and keep building and
pushing forward is just a really great
way to kind of stay in this industry so
you've mentioned a few times s in our
conversation bit VM so I'm curious is
Bob possible without bit VM well yes it
is possible without a bit VM but it well
can we get a Bitcoin Fork instead right
bit VM is I think a culmination of a lot
of work that has been done in Bitcoin
before and I have to admit like I spent
years working on Bridges and I don't
think I would have seen that you can
design the system that way so Robin
deserves all the credit for really
coming up and spending the time of like
experimenting until he came up with with
the mechanism but if we zoom out and
like to answer your question what is
like we need to understand what bit VM
is bit VM is a way for us to execute
smart contracts on bitcoin but Bitcoin
right the assumption is always Bitcoin
doesn't have Smart contracts well that's
actually not true Bitcoin has smart
contracts or Bitcoin has a scripting
language and in theory you can write any
program arbitrary programs using that
language the problem is that something
that's like five lines of quote in
solidity is a thousand lines of code in
script because you just have to write
everything yourself think of it this way
like multiplication in in in the in when
you code you just write multiply in
Bitcoin it's like I mean I'm
exaggerating but you're like just adding
things manually which which is just to
exemplify how the thing is structured so
yes we can write any program but these
things get so big that they don't fit
into a block and then we have two
options like what we want to do with Bob
is we want to allow you to deposit
Bitcoin into a side system that has
Bitcoin security and always withdraw as
long as Bitcoin security holds so for
this we need to be able to verify that
Bob has finalized on bitcoin right the
Bitcoin security we can get with or
without bitm there's different
mechanisms some better some worse that
the core of the system is the bridge
within Bitcoin within bitcoin's
scripting language we have to verify
that hey there was a transaction on Bob
that says Alexa is withdrawing his rap
BC back to bitcoin let's make sure he
gets them and nobody else can get them
and that needs to be executed on bitcoin
and verify that was done correctly and
that doesn't work in Bitcoin today
because yes we could write these
programs we could take a snark verifier
right the first thing you do is you take
these complex programs you compress them
into a snark which is like constant in
size it's compact still too big a
gigabyte in script right Bitcoin blocks
are four megabyte in size at most so
really doesn't doesn't add up
and so we have two options then we can
introduce a fork and add more
functionality to bitcoin and that
basically compresses these programs we
require less lines of code and we might
be able to fit it in would still be
expensive or we use bit VM which says
let's take these things off chain run
them offchain and only do something
onchain if something goes wrong so it's
the equivalent of arbitrum essentially
but on Bitcoin now wouldit Bob be
possible without this no like we need
one way or another to securely verify
that deposits have been made and
withdrawals have been made on the side
system and bit VM today is the only
thing that is practical the only thing
that actually works and I've spent many
many years trying to design Bridges we
came up with other solutions that were
Game Theory based but very inefficient
in terms of capital requirements and
bitm has the right balance it's not the
simplest system there is right but it
works provably and it's a very good
design that does require forks and we'll
eventually get a soft fork and any soft
Fork that we might get will help make
bit VM even more efficient even more
practical even easier to use so we could
do Bob without this but it wouldn't be
as good of a product right and I do
think that Bitcoin l2s the one thing
they need to do is they have to allow
you to use Bitcoin on them without
introducing third party trust
assumptions it's going to take time for
us to get there because sure we'll have
bit VM will be ready next year that's
pretty sure by now like we'll see
prototypes end of this year test Nets
early next year and the main rolling out
how soon will billions of dollars move
on to bit VM that's going to take some
time because the technical risk of a new
system is always quite High people are
cautious they should be and many people
will initially prefer institutional risk
over technical risk but the beauty of
technical risk is it declines over time
whereas institutional risk tends to
increase as people get corrupt when they
make a lot of money or regulations
change or something like that so yes Bob
needs bit VM bit VM is already there but
we could also do it better if we had
Forks on bitcoin but I wouldn't bet on a
fork I wouldn't bet my business on a
forening in the next six months let's
put it this way when we talk about
trustless and and levels of
decentralization there's always uh
tradeoffs and decentralization is a
Spectrum it's not the end all be all uh
if you look at like ethereum l2s the
sequencer networks you could have a
completely
decentralized optimistic sequencer
network but you're not getting finality
for a week or you could have in B's case
centralized sequencer in coinbase but
you have to completely trust the third
party to verify that the transactions uh
end up on the l1's state so what were
some of the tra TR offs that you guys
had to conceptualize and what were the
exercises of the trade-offs of trustless
for the bridging solution that Bob uses
and where did you end up and why did you
end up using that solution what we often
hear is that Bob has a pragmatic
approach to building products I think
ultimately it's very important to be
highly opinionated about how the world
should look like and what the future
should look like and that's why we have
our Hy design Vision where we clearly
outlan Cate Bitcoin security Bitcoin
bridge but then also trust minimize
Bridges from ethereum and later from
Salan all the other Big L ones that are
secured by Bitcoin replacing the need
for centralized exchanges ultimately if
this hopefully works over time and we
can replicate the network effects
because the assumption is right there's
one thing we all trust in that Bitcoin
is secure let's use that as the basis
assumption rather than having to go to
centralized exchanges but to get there
and to build and be have the opportunity
to build for so for that time like for
for really event iterating over on the
product and growing to be able to really
have the trust of users to use things
like BVM and on at scale you have to be
pragmatic and this also means realizing
that as mentioned before right now
people prefer institutional risk on the
Bitcoin side Bitcoin has highly
institutional Iz there'll be a lot of
Institutions that want to use Bitcoin
you can choose to exclude them or you
work with them and if you think about it
people use bass why do people use bass
because they trust coinbase should that
be the reason they use bass probably not
but you also have to be realistic that
is the reason why they use base so you
have to offer people Solutions and allow
them to start using Bitcoin now and then
work with them to gradually improve the
product like I don't think it makes
sense for me to say okay I'm going to
build more competive for 2 years and
then I'm going to release a bit VM
bridge that is super secure but nobody
can use it for 2 years nobody really
cares and and then I don't really know
what people want do people really want
to use it that way or maybe I
misunderstood how people will be using
Bitcoin and Defi and the way of designed
the bridge is completely useless now
because maybe I made it non funable
because it's easier and more secure but
well non funable Bitcoin in D5 where you
cannot mix them and send them around
doesn't work so there's like these kind
of pitfalls that you might miss if you
just you know lock yourself in your room
and only work on the tech so I think
it's really important to accept that
today things are centralized and yes we
want to go from zero to one but it
doesn't work that way with changing user
behaviors you can't force people to
change how they behave how they interact
with web three wallets um especially how
they are used to us using neobanks for
example and you have to meet you have to
meet the users where the users are and
take them by the hand and show them
what's possible and that means finding
the right balance between security and
transparency but also usability and so
for Bob when we look at the solutions we
have today we support a variety of
different Bitcoin bridging Solutions we
have tbtc which is currently the most
decentralized and robust PTC Bridge
which uses essentially simplified NPC or
threshold signatures right they have 30
plus signers I think they're actually
more by now that are globally
distributed and you don't know who they
are and they're rotating and that's a
really good design but then you also
have double BTC you have Sol BTC you
have fbtc which are institutional
solutions that are custodial but they
also have NPC multisig in the background
but they're in run by companies yes you
trust the business is that what we
ultimately want in 10 years or no no is
that something that allows people to
access Bitcoin today and show them how
to use defi yes and then you can choose
and who am I to prescribe to theer and
force them to use only one Bitcoin
Bridge solution our goal is to find new
use cases and make Bitcoin more useful
so the way Bob is rolling out is
gradually so we support a variety of
bitco solutions right now and we're
working on bit VM while we work on bit
VM on the research and development side
and that's the technical research team
on the product side we work on making
Bitcoin defi more accessible so we
realize that ux just like trust is a big
bir on bitcoin defi users it's it's a
it's a HD it's hard to get in what we
did is we built something we call Bob
stake which is a one click Bitcoin
staking product it's an SDK and a portal
um and allows you to take your Bitcoin
and deploy it into a variety of
different Bitcoin dii Solutions be it
staking through Babylon liquid staking
where you can then use it in Def opening
def volts lending a Bitcoin out
borrowing against it supplying into
dexes doing more complex strategies as
much risk as you want to take or as
little risky one to take but all
abstracted all the complexity of picking
one of 10 different bridging interfaces
picking one of 10 different dexes
navigating their interfaces that always
abstracted behind a single Bitcoin
transaction you make a transaction on
bitcoin you're done you have your
position you can withdraw with another
transaction and you're happy and that's
where you life on mainnet and that
process itself like going from Bitcoin
to whatever asset that is trustless it
doesn't introduce any additional trust
ass assumtions of course you do trust
whatever rap Bitcoin or like defi
project you're using but people want to
use Bitcoin and defi we see that there
is demand and people don't want to wait
for another 10 years and you have to
find the solution people are comfortable
with give them the chance to educate
themselves provide them the information
of okay what are the risks Associated
this might be a centralized solution if
you're trusting the company that's
operating this you're good to go but
this way you make it accessible and you
give people the choice and that's
something we have on Bitcoin today you
have that on ethereum on Solana and so
on and arguably not all of these the the
only a very small part of the solution
is actually fully decentralized but on
bitcoin we always obviously aim for the
highest standards and unfortunately if
you only aim for something that might be
possible and super secure in 5 years but
isn't usable now people are just going
to go somewhere else and Bitcoin is
going to miss out on a lot of the
Innovation but then again you need the
users you need the feedback to actually
build a secure solution for the users
for the use cases they want and that's
why for us it's gradual we work with
piton Bridges today make sure you can
easily on board and then at the same
time we work on bit VM and then we'll
offer this in parallel we'll make bit VM
also accessible through one click one of
the motivations of building Bob STI is
actually that to use BVM without running
extra software you'll need something
like this for retail users and then
eventually as people gain more trust and
build their trust in bit VM and then
this bridging technology that is really
trust minimized like we nobody can steal
your Bitcoin but it could break because
it's new tech and new code and so on But
as time progresses and you have more
people using it people will switch why
because if it's as usable as everything
else and it's secure and it's built in a
way and integrated into products that
people really want to use because we've
worked with them closely and understood
what they want then people will use the
more secure solution so you've mentioned
several times through our convers ation
today that bit VM is going to enable and
Empower these levels of decentralization
for Bob and you've also mentioned that
we won't really start seeing bit VM
projects roll out until next year so can
you maybe just like Eli 5 or elevator
pitch or maybe just from a 10,000 foot
view explain where bit VM is in its
development cycle and why maybe it's
taking I don't want to say so long for
projects to launch uh using bit VM but
maybe what the security uh protections
are so that people are kind of being
slow to Rolling Out projects leveraging
bit VM so the current state of bit VM is
that you have an open source repository
the core system of bit VM works and now
what's being done is building tooling
support for it and building the actual
Bridge protocol you could take a snark
you can plug it into Bitcoin and you can
verify whether that thing was correct
that per se works but there is more to
it right there is using that to build a
bridge the client software making sure
that the operator software is ready that
the clients the Challenger software is
ready so people can actually challenge
this easily making that easy to run so
you can have a lot of people running
this inow like when they interact with
the l2s so you have a high chance that
there will be someone online and you
only need one person but someone has to
be online to actually trigger a
challenge or something goes wrong right
just like on ethal 2s you have to also
audit these things you have to battle
this so right now we're at a stage that
prototypes we're like at under thisp
attack stage you'll see test Nets by end
of year you have some early test Nets
now like end of year you'll see bit VM
on test net most likely maybe early next
year but that's kind of the current
state in parallel there is also a lot of
work on the design side like there what
people don't yet understand is bfm
doesn't solve the bridging problem
itself what bit VM allows us to do is to
create a l Cline to like Cline Bridge or
a B directional L Cline Bridge what does
that mean it means that if you have two
chains chain one verifies the minting on
the on bitcoin let's say the side chain
verifies that you've locked your Bitcoin
on this on the on the Bitcoin main chain
and then it mints the rap Bitcoin and
then when you go back Bitcoin through
Bitcoin verifies that you've burned the
rap Bitcoin and then make sure you get
it back so you have these light clients
that verify the chains that's the most
secure way to build Bitcoin Bridges
that's the only trust minimized way you
can build a bridge in general the only
thing you need is someone to submit
these proofs now getting that done and
the design is basically there in the
paper but then there's nuances and okay
how does a light client look like and
that depends on how the sideen looks
like is it L2 that inherits security
through being a rollup on bitcoin or is
it it merge mining or is it staking or
is it maybe ethereum but then for
ethereum o building a l c for ethereum
doesn't really work so okay you you run
into issues there if you want to do it
for cardano or polka do well you might
also run into issues because these
things potentially are not as easy to
work with or it's different
cryptographical Primitives and just on
the code side it's it's you have to add
a lot of new things to be able to
support this within bit VM so that's one
thing that you need to do and that's
where the research is happening right
now how do we make sure that we have the
secure l cines so we can build the
secure Bridges and then you need to
actually build the product CER at top
make sure that it's usable that's
already progressed that's what we've
already done so we kind of have that
part solved and if you think about like
for comparison with ethereum right it
took 5 years plus before you actually
had real rollups Bitcoin is going to be
much much faster because also ethereum
did a lot of the initial research work
like we know how rollups work we know
the properties we know how what doesn't
work so Bitcoin is kind of I would say
halfway through that cycle that ethereum
has gone through maybe even closer we
will see these things go live next year
so I wouldn't say it's slow the bitf
paper came out a bit more than a year
ago and the original design wasn't
practical so bit vm2 the one that
actually works came out in August now
and then you should you actually have to
start counting from then because that's
where for the first time we're like okay
we this you can build this and this is
actually going to work for a bitcom
bridge and then the last bit to mention
is that using bitm for full rollups is
still a thing of research it's not as
straightforward to make that efficient
right so you always have to deal with
the question of the costs on bitcoin how
much data do you post how often do you
post that and there's still quite a few
open research questions there so my
prediction is we'll see Bitcoin bridges
that use bit VM on Main at first that
will happen probably in the first half
of next year with training wheels right
but so these things will not launch
without like having like fail safes
initially and then gradually towards the
end of the year I think will people will
start turning off the fail if everything
works well and then in parallel towards
the end of the year you'll start seeing
Bitcoin Ru of like construction come to
the market if you had to make like a
spicy guess you would say that maybe we
have like a super simple main net bit VM
bridging solution available Q4 2025 well
Define M net right I can launch
something on Main net but would I tell
you to put a million dollars into it I
don't know so the question is I think
like a testet a pre-launch test net I
think q1 like pre- audit pre-main test
net where you can actually go use it and
it feels like a product but then Audits
and gradual roll out with like that
happens but look again our eth rollups
on Main Nets there are M it but how many
of them have fra proofs how many of them
have a multisig fail safe so I think the
standards that big cors have for these
things are very high and sometimes a bit
too high in terms of product thinking
and again it's if you're selling
security you shouldn't take shortcuts on
one hand on the other hand you just if
you want to build a product you have to
take shortcuts so the approach here is
be very transparent about what already
Works what are the risks what's here to
date and what is being worked on I think
that is that's the doctrine that we have
at B we're very transparent about what
works works today and what we're working
on and will be rolling out in the near
future like we're an ealb today very
simple we don't have Bitcoin security
yet we are working on it and we have a
few really cool designs that are very
unique and allow us to combine the Two
Worlds and I wish more teams would
actually be honest about the state of
things but of course that's not always
in the interest of of everyone on the
marketing side so I can highly recommend
Bitcoin layers as the equivalent of L2
bead but for Bitcoin L2
I appreciate the that you called out the
length of time that it took for rollups
on ethereum to kind of come to fruition
after conceptualization 5 years and that
there were a lot of lessons that bit VM
and Bitcoin L2 developers have kind of
leveraged from that research that went
into those scaling Solutions are have we
seen any sort of like bir directional
relationship have evm based rollups
learned anything from bit VM yet has bit
VM uncovered anything that can help
these rollups in evm land have have we
seen anything like that yet I don't
think so I don't think many people on
the evm side are fully aware of what bit
VM is no I don't think we're at a stage
where you'd go and say look hey ether
roll up you should learn from bit VM
like the trick of bit VM is is making it
work on bitcoin that's what it's all
about you don't have these problem s on
ethereum so the thing with bitf is
solving it for Bitcoin specifically but
solving it only for Bitcoin it happens
to be bigger than everything else so
it's like there I think there is a very
good reason to to actually Sol this
thing for Bitcoin but EBS did learn a
lot from Bitcoin research because a lot
of the early research came from the
Bitcoin Community that's where it all
started and then gradually ethereum
started becoming a Powerhouse of ZK
research as well and and of course took
over at some point but I think
eventually and I see this happening
Bitcoin will become the PowerHouse of
research and Innovation again if I just
look at the amount of papers and
research being published and released
over the last year compared to the years
before that it's and we call it the
Innovation heartbeat and it's really
accelerating and it's really really
great to see again so Bob launched in
May of this year uh and there's a hefty
amount of tvl that's in the ecosystem so
can you maybe just share maybe even take
moment to show the success that that Bob
has seen in being able to aggregate this
tvl what have been some of the Lessons
Learned who of these users that have
been using Bob and using their Bitcoin
who have they been are they just like
dormant Bitcoin holders or are they
degens from ethereum uh yeah I would
just love to hear your insights so Bob
launched early in May this year and
since then we've we've come we've come
quite a long way so we we have seen a
lot of users try out the platform and
actually also come back if we were to
drop some stats um we've seen 320,000
unique users interact with Bob if you
count wallets it's around 400,000 if
actually interested in the unique users
of course we've reached $250 million in
dii tvl we've have more T like liquidity
that's currently on chain and it
gradually validating experiment with
different Solutions I think the latest
number is 450 million um but again I'm
always cautious saying these numbers
because if the Bitcoin price goes down
it changes if it because up it changes
so I think it's it matters because it
shows that that people starting to trust
the ecosystem that it also validates a
lot of our assumptions around what
people want to do with their Bitcoin and
I think some of the most exciting things
are Bitcoin liquid staking products so
where we for the first time and even if
it's still early right and there is no
real taking rewards turn yet because the
things are not fully live the fact that
people are so excited about it even now
just validates that there is demand and
if you look at the Bitcoin staking
market today the Babylon cap chest went
live Babylon previously was sitting
around $2 billion right it's going to
grow and if you compare that to ethereum
liquid staking which sits at what 46 47
48 $50
billion and then you extrapolate
comparing this like facturing in the
size of ethereum the size of Bitcoin
Bitcoin taking could be a $200 billion
Market that's very big that's of course
assuming that we managed to activate
that dormant liquidity but we see the
early signs of that and we see the early
signs of that in Bob as well and the
interesting bit is that early signs on
bitcoin already means that you're pretty
big which is fascinating right that's
why if you win on bitcoin you don't just
win in Bitcoin you win the entire Market
because Bitcoin is just bigger than
everything everything else it's also why
it's so hard like if you have to have
patience if you rush things Bitcoin is
going to chew you up and spit you out
right so it requires time to also build
trust with these users and also like it
just validates some of our assumptions
um and just shows like how Bitcoin
liquidity behaves trust matters a lot
and like if you look at the apps on Bob
Unis swap is the largest in tvl in fact
Bob is the number five un sub deployment
in size and um people just prefer to
supply liquidity there than anywhere
else because they trust uni Swap and you
can really see the difference between
like Unis on Bob and other l2s were
often like some native Dex is doing
better because in this like the user
base is different right like bitcoiners
and Bitcoin holders and just even defi
users with treat their Bitcoin
differently than they treat their Ethan
they treat their soul and their other
coins Bitcoin is this thing that you
don't want to lose you're careful with
it you're just it's it's so
indoctrinated
in in everyone's Minds that you have to
be cautious so that's an interesting
observation yeah so and then otherwise
um I think one of the exciting things
that we've we've been able to achieve is
the launcher of Bob stake this oneclick
Bitcoin staking aggregator that really
abstracts away this complexity if you
were to draw a technical buzzword it's
the first ever instance in
implementations uh implementation of
Bitcoin intents so what you see on
ethereum now also exists on bitcoin um
we also have Smart accounts for bitco so
the things that you usually see in
ethereum and then Bitcoin will take like
10 years to follow now suddenly we're
getting them on Bitcoin in the same
cycle which is actually quite exciting
and we're also very of course proud in
this case that we're able to to
contribute to this new development I
guess that Bitcoin is suddenly no longer
10 years behind on these things so yeah
and then there we've we've actually had
wallets announced that they're
integrating the staking aggregators um
institutional staking providers um some
very big institutional custodians that
we're working with as well so um all in
all very exciting um for Bob it's it's a
lot of lessons learned a lot of
interesting observations of how people
interact with the platform which things
work what doesn't work things that
people really want like getting Bitcoin
out of the system being able to unstake
quickly for example is a feature request
that we've seen very frequently but also
being able to deploy Bitcoin not only on
B but also cross chain so yeah that's
it's been very very busy and we have a
lot more in store for next year I'm
going to be interviewing uh Fisher from
Babylon uh this week actually so this
this interview and Fishers is part of a
Bitcoin Builders ecosystem kind of
series we're doing for the smart economy
podcast and for those who aren't
familiar Babylon is a non-custodial
staking architecture are there any other
protocols or architectures that are on
Bob's radar right now that you guys are
really excited to to dig into and to
support is there anything like that that
you're keeping your eye on I mean
there's a lot but then also with the
caveat that once you have bit VM you
basically can do anything with Bitcoin
that you see on ethereum defi today but
having said that we're still very
interested in things like better Bitcoin
multi6 right like why why Bitcoin why
would a Bitcoin L2 want a native Bitcoin
multic right well if you think about it
can you name me a bitco multi today like
a really successful one no if you if I
asked you can you name me the top five
on ethereum you'll probably only know
Jos is safe because that's the biggest
one right and we've supported a team
called Coffer Network that's been
actually working on um building a bit
bit of bit kotas that actually is
designed to integrate smart accounts
early on so you can go from your cold
storage to your deployments on E on
Define Bitcoin l2s and you can go back
and forth so you have the same Key
Management same interface for your cold
storage and your hot deployments but
they're H they happen to be in a genosis
multi so also actually quite secure so
that is something that we're super
excited about and this kind of
infrastructure that really makes it
easier to use Bitcoin um we've seen
Bitcoin back stable coin designs that
use like on the economic and product
side but also on the technical
Innovation side that try to use things
like dlc's or things that try to do
Bitcoin back loans so lending
protocols and I have to admit because we
work on bit VM like Technical Solutions
that our alternatives are interesting we
exploring them but ultimately what we
really look for and we're really excited
about are the products things that make
this more accessible because we we have
the infrastructure right we have trusted
Landing protocols and Landing markets we
have dexes like Unis Swap and Bob we
have on and off Rams we can make it
super easy for you to deploy Bitcoin
into the Z protocols so what we're
really excited about are distribution
channels how do we make this accessible
to different user groups the tech is
there and how do you pack to this as a
product and what products do people want
how do they want to use a Bitcoin do
they want to go long short or do they
just want to stake it and not touch it
do they want a DCA do they would people
take loans against Bitcoin microloans
would they use this with credit cards so
that's the kind of thing that we're
really looking into and are super
excited about because it takes a certain
skill to really work with local
audiences and build local businesses and
that is also I think one of the
superpowers of Bitcoin it that there are
so many local communities that have very
different problems and very different
approaches to solving them but Bitcoin
is still somewhere at the core and
that's what we're actually trying to
support and talk to as many of these
teams as possible to see okay can we
make your life easier you were privileg
trying to solve this with lightning and
DLCs well look we actually have a
solution that makes it easier and you
get get stable quins and you get
exchange on offs and you get smart
accounts so you can onboard your users
with their email and not force them to
not down their 12 word c but of course
they can go Google full self custody
afterwards so as you can see like we're
moving more towards the product side I
love infrastructure I love the tech but
I love products even more so kind of
zooming out and wrapping up um I know
you just mentioned that you love
products but I Bob has currently in pH
one of a three-phase roll out the first
phase is bootstrapping as it's basically
an ethereum L2 which is now done so what
are the next two phases and can you just
share a little bit about what users can
expect of course so in phase one I
mentioned bootstrapping as an e rollup
get B Class infra we make sure we have
all the tools there's no difference
between building on Bob base or optimism
in terms of tooling infrastructure
support right you don't have to worry
about that you can focus on what matters
meaning the coin side of things you
don't have to reinvent the wheel and
here we really focused on bitcoin into
defy deployment so making that
accessible and then in phase two we add
Bitcoin finality to the E rollup so this
means that on top of checking for fra
proofs on ethereum on the L1 contract of
ethereum would also check for Bitcoin
finality now we're integrating a
finality gadget for this there is
multiple ways of doing that we'll be
releasing some information on this
actually next week so depending on when
this podcast airs this information might
be out or not and that will allow us
actually to then have Bitcoin Security
on top of the etheroll up and with this
we will then also build and get to
production the bit VM bridge that allows
us to then deploy Bitcoin into Bob and
that bridge will'll use that Bitcoin
finality as security anchor which is
actually one of the only ways to make
bitm fully practical with Bitcoin
security right now in the next couple of
months
and then in the Final Phase so so in
phase two what we have is an etheroll
that has Bitcoin finality and a trust
minimize Bitcoin Bridge that's already
pretty good better than the majority
things almost everything on the market
if if we're honest like to attack Bob in
phase two you have to attack ethereum
you have to attack Bitcoin or like the
subset of Bitcoin operators and nodes
that work on this finale side that's
already pretty hard and then in phase
three in the final phas is when we will
then move the settlement from ethereum
over to bitcoin so that when that's when
bit VM turns from bridge to actual full
settlement prod settlement layer that
per same theory is already possible the
problem are the data availability costs
right if you want to do frog proofs you
need the data posting data to bitcoin is
very expensive posting it somewhere else
means you trust that something else and
need to check that the data was actually
posted to react on the Bitcoin side and
if you don't know whether the data was
posted or not you're kind of opening
yourself up to the attack with the
sequencer says I'm not going to post the
data so you don't know what I'm going to
do and then I'm going to do something
bad and Bitcoin doesn't know about it so
solving that problem in an efficient way
is the last missing piece on the
research side and you could have two
ways of solving
that Tech making it more efficient or
scal being big enough so that you can
split spread the cost among sufficient
users so it's less than a cent per user
that Pro transaction and then you're
also fine so that is essentially the
final of phase three phase two will
start ruling out in q1 perfect I kind of
want to end this uh fascinating
conversation with an existential
question especially for someone who's
been in Bitcoin for 10 plus years the
crypto anarchists kind of touted the
success of Bitcoin because it will
inevitably replace a Nation States
currency but today we're seeing Black
Rock Fidelity vanc accumulate massive
amounts of Bitcoin so we have this
corporate overhaul of entities
accumulating this asset if you go on to
crypto Twitter right now you see people
touting Russia and the Us and other
large scale countries even smaller
countries adding Bitcoin as a part of
their National Reserve so do you think
that we're at some sort of bizarre
Crossroads where we're touting
corporates and governments to allocate
resources to owning this asset and is
this good or bad for us that's a very
interesting take and I mean it is a very
interesting situation right I think it
is of course controversial to some
extent where Bitcoin was supposed to
replace the banks and now the banks are
selling your Bitcoin on the other hand
Bitcoin is many things right you it's
hard to predict what Bitcoin will end up
being in 10 years from now what it seem
where it seems to be heading is a global
neutral assets and if you look at our
current current geopolitical situation
there is reason I guess for nation
states looking to acquire Bitcoin
because they see that eventually there
might be a
multi-polar state of the world might be
we don't know right but for the fact
that there might be Bitcoin is the one
thing that actually is neutral and even
if yes some Nations is trying to buy it
up ultimately it is neutral so I I think
it's a big role in geopolitics we shall
see but that it does come with
interesting consequences for the web3
community in terms of making changes to
bitcoin I think there is a very short
window in which we could actually still
make a fork before Bitcoin becomes so
institutionalized that it's even slower
to make changes and yes I believe me
that is it can go even slower and at the
same time I think there's also an
opportunity for
l2s uh the flipping that I would like to
see is that there's more bit coin on
bitcoin secured l2s with trust minimized
Bridges than in ETFs so I think it's a
double-edged sword yes Bitcoin is going
mainstream everybody is is gets no
Bitcoin we are at the same time we're
seeing more chains that become
accessible some more people entering web
3 and there'll probably be like this
moment of of truth right like which way
does it go do the banks win and just
everybody stays over the banks and uses
Bitcoin there or does Bitcoin win and
everybody go to bitcoin because the
banks omed them to bitcoin people
accepted Bitcoin and then they started
using Bitcoin themselves that is to be
seen I'm obviously cautiously optimistic
that with the ux improvements and with
the developments that we've seen on
Bitcoin in the recent months and last
two three years we're in a very good
trajectory to actually succeed at
building platforms that allow you to use
Bitcoin the same we use it with banks
and that you don't need it back to get
Bitcoin it's super easy to access only
the Fiat on an offr will always be a
problem unless you build big enough
scale little Pew to Pew markets and that
is already happening so there is a risk
the flipping I want to see is more
Bitcoin on l2s than on ETFs but the time
is like the clock is ticking I
definitely personally kind of start
feeling the pressure and maybe it's an
imaginary maybe not but you know the
more Bitcoin banks by the less Cypher
Punk it might become in the next 5 years
meaning the less changes we can do to
enable the centralized things to happen
on bitcoin that could challenge these
Banks Alexa this has been a fantastic
conversation if anybody heard this and
is psyched who do you want to speak to
and what's the best way they can reach
out to you so you can always find me on
Twitter that's probably the easiest I'm
quite open and responsive in my DMs I'd
love to speak if you're a Bitcoin user
and you want to do more with your
Bitcoin I'd love to learn about you know
what is it why and if you don't want to
do more with the Bitcoin I'd also love
to learn why why not like what are the
things that make you concerned um yeah
well awesome thank you so much for
taking time out of your busy hectic
schedule day life end of year uh this
conversation was amazing and I can't
wait to share it with the smart economy
podcast listeners so much thanks for
your time thanks for having me cheers
byebye well thank you so much for tuning
in to the smart economy podcast this
stay in the loop with all of our
episodes and insights head over to
www.smart economy podcast.com and don't
forget to subscribe to our YouTube
channel for all of our video content if
you enjoyed today's discussion please
consider showing your support by liking
commenting and reviewing this episode on
your favorite podcasting platform your
feedback helps us reach more listeners
and bring even better content your way
we'd also love to hear from you so
please drop a comment on Spotify or
YouTube to share what topics you would
like us to cover and who you might like
us to interview as our next guest and if
you or someone you know might make a
great guest please reach out we're
always looking for fresh voices and New
Perspectives and for our Neo token
holders please consider voting for Neo
news today as your Council
representative we've proudly been
serving the Neo ecosystem since
2017 we'll continue to do so by putting
portions of our rewards directly back
into ecosystem growth
initiatives with all of that said thank
you so much for taking the time to
listen to the smart economy podcast and
we look forward to catching you next
time
[Applause]